And now for the second part and conclusion of this code challenge.
Let's continue with exercise four.
There are six exercises in total, although the last one is like super simple and fast.
Anyway, the goal of this exercise here is to create the trajectories in PC space and also plot the
distances between the nouns and the adjectives.
Now the middle and the right plots that you see here.
You have also seen a couple of videos ago.
Exactly, almost exactly the same.
Of course, the labels and so on are a little bit different.
So again, you can copy and paste and modify or write the code from scratch.
Now this plot on the left I haven't shown you previously, but it's just plotting the projections onto
the two principal components for nouns and adjectives over all of the layers.
In fact, this middle plot here, these trajectories, that is literally the same data that you see
in the left plot here.
The only difference is that here the layer is plotted on the x axis, whereas here the layer dimension
is plotted implicitly through the two principal components.
Okay.
So here the principal components projections are all on the y axis.
And here in the middle plot I have the component one on the x axis and component two projection on the
y axis.
So it's quite striking how different the trajectories are for nouns and adjectives.
That is quite different from what we saw two videos ago, where the pronouns and also the word round
generally followed a similar trajectory through the state space.
Of course, there were some differences.
Now it is your turn to have a go at this, and now I will switch to code and discuss these results.
Here I am calculating the average over all the 150 instances of the nouns and adjectives.
The code is nearly identical to the code from a couple of videos ago.
Of course, the variable names are a little bit different.
Uh, and also, yeah, just working with the lookup table, if you're copying and pasting the code,
you have to be mindful of that because you will remember in the previous video, uh, two videos ago,
this element here in the lookup table actually corresponded to the sentence index, whereas here it
corresponds to the layer index.
And then yeah, here we have uh target one and target two.
So these correspond to the nouns and these correspond to the adjectives.
Okay.
So I can run that code.
And now I can run this code.
This is also uh, all of this code is exactly what you have seen in the previous two videos ago.
Uh, just with some minor modifications.
This code up here is new, but it's not terribly difficult.
In fact, it's literally the same thing that I'm plotting here.
Except here I'm plotting PC1 by PC2.
That's how you create these state space trajectories.
And here I'm just plotting all of the PCs independently of each other, uh, the projections independently
of each other.
And implicit in here is the layers.
So, you know, you could have something like this, uh, in, uh, layers like this, if you wanted
to have an explicit x axis, uh, tick.
But that's not really necessary.
say, okay, so let's have a small discussion about this.
The most striking result that pops out here is that the projections onto the first principal component
are not identical, but quite similar for nouns and adjectives.
So PC1 looks really similar and PC2 the projection onto PC2.
That's where we really see a striking difference between nouns and adjectives.
So here you see the data, the PC components plotted for over the different layers.
And here you see the state space trajectories.
Also, as you have seen before, there's something funky going on with the very last transformer block.
Yeah.
It's just a that's a fairly typical pattern for lots of ways of looking at the data.
So but also yeah, the most striking thing here is that there's this really large Divergence between
the nouns and the adjectives.
They really just kind of go off into opposite signs in PC2.
So this indicates that the model really has a pretty strong divergence in how these two categories of
of grammar words are processed internally.
And by the way, just a small note in case you're wondering whether this is just due to the arbitrariness
of the sign in principal components analysis, then that actually cannot account for this, because
the sign indeterminacy would flip the sign of the entire axis.
So it could be possible to have the adjectives positive and the nouns negative, but it wouldn't flip
just one condition, it would flip the entire axis.
If you have no idea what I'm talking about, this is a important but nuanced detail of principal components
analysis.
Basically, that the signs are a little bit arbitrary, and there are some principled methods for figuring
out whether the axis should be positive versus negative.
Yeah, but don't don't worry about those details.
Okay.
And anyway here you see the diff distances between nouns and adjectives.
So this is now for each individual layer I'm just looking at the distance between each successive point.
So this point and this point for each layer.
Well the title of this video is all about whether nouns or adjectives have longer trajectories.
We have not yet approached that question, but that is the goal here.
So what you will need to do for this exercise is calculate the distance between each successive point
in this plot.
Now, this is not a plot you need to create here for exercise five.
It's literally the plot that you created in exercise four.
I just put it here for illustration.
So the distance metric that you calculated in the previous exercise, that was the distance between
nouns and adjectives within each layer.
But that is not what you want to calculate here for the trajectory path distance.
Instead here you want to calculate the distance traveled by this particle going from layer to layer
or this vector within each category.
For each layer relative to the previous layer.
Okay, so the idea is to imagine that these are like hiking trails.
These are two hiking trails here, the Red trail and the Blue Trail.
And you're walking along these hiking trails.
And the question is which of these two trails is longer?
So you calculate the Euclidean distance from each layer Relative to the previous layer.
In other words, the Euclidean distance from each point to the next point in this trajectory.
Now I decided to implement this analysis twice.
I did it once in a for loop.
So looping over all the layers.
And I did that because it really helped me think about how the analysis works mechanistically, and
also how the distance is calculated between each successive pair of layers within each part of speech
category.
But it turns out that you do not need for loops to run this calculation.
You can actually do the whole thing vectorized without any loops.
Now, my personal preference with coding is that I generally find for loops easier to understand.
But of course vectorized code is more efficient and less prone to coding errors, and it's often faster
anyway, as long as you get the right answer, it's fine.
So these two plots here show the main results that you want to generate in exercise five.
Here on the left we have the token distances over all of the layers.
So you're going to have two lines in this plot.
One for the nouns and one for the adjectives.
And the y axis is the distance between each layer and the previous layer within the same category.
Now these distances can get really big, especially towards the end of the path towards the end of the
trajectory.
So therefore, what I did and what I recommend doing is plotting the log of the distances instead of
the linear distance.
That just facilitates visual interpretation, as I've mentioned earlier in the course that log scaling
is often done in machine learning and statistics, when there are really large differences between the
numerical values in the plot.
Anyway, once you have those two lines for nouns and adjectives, then you can just literally subtract
the two layer by layer and show those results over here.
So this is literally just the difference of the log distances for nouns versus adjectives.
Okay.
But importantly, you know, this exercise is not just about generating a plot.
So before you create this graph, before you look at the results, I want you to think again about which
way you predict the results to come out.
Do you think that nouns or adjectives have longer trajectories in this state space?
Based on some ideas that you might have about how much processing and token integration is required
for nouns versus adjectives.
Very good.
Pause the video now and switch to code.
And now I will do the same and discuss some of the results.
Here I initialize a matrix called distances.
You can see it is the number of layers minus one, because we are calculating the distance from each
layer to the previous.
So therefore I start looping over the layers from the second layer.
Of course that actually corresponds to the first transformer block.
Okay.
And then the two is for the two different categories of words.
So here I get the x points and the y points of this here.
So you know for any given point here I have two x coordinates that I need to calculate Euclidean distance.
This point here.
So this x y coordinate and this xy coordinate.
And once we have those two coordinates then we can calculate Euclidean distance.
And yeah here's the formula.
So difference of the x's squared plus the difference of the y's squared.
And then we take the square root of that.
Okay.
So then that gives me the distances.
And then plotting that I'm going to discuss this plot in a moment.
First I just want to show what the code looks like to calculate the distances without any for loops.
So here I'm subtracting all of the x values for one to the end from the beginning to the end minus one.
Now this is a vector right up here.
These were just scalars.
These are individual numbers.
So now these are vectors.
And now I can calculate the difference vector squared element wise and then square root of that.
And then this is just a confirmation.
If this calculation is really the same as this calculation, then their differences should be zeros
which they are.
So that's great.
And then just using zero here because I only ran this analysis for the nouns.
If you wanted to repeat it for the adjectives you just turn all of these into ones.
And then we can subtract like this.
And we also get a bunch of zeros.
Very good.
Okay.
So now let's go back to these results.
Now we see actually I do want to show what this looks like without the log.
So this is the plot with log scaling without log scaling.
Perfectly valid results.
But these values over here are just so big that they dominate the y axis.
And you don't really see much of anything happening really anywhere in the model until the very, very
end.
So that is why when you have a situation like this, it's probably a good idea to log scale.
Then you can see the more subtle features of the plots.
For example, here we see that the nouns have larger distances and the adjectives for a series of,
I don't know, 4 or 5 different layers in a row.
This is this feature.
This this result is technically present in the linear scaling, but they're so scrunched together that
you don't actually see it.
Okay.
Anyway, here are the differences here.
Uh, and let me see.
This was so you can calculate the logs separately and then subtract them.
I did it this way because I just wanted to give you a quick reminder of the law of logarithms, which
basically says that the difference of logs is equal to the ratio or the log of the ratio.
So, uh, just to make sure that's super clear.
These two expressions are the same.
So the log of something minus the log of another thing that is mathematically equivalent to I can even
plot this again, you can see the plot doesn't change.
This is mathematically equivalent to taking one log transform of a ratio.
Okay.
Just a little bit of reminder about algebra.
So here we see the differences here.
You know this the this is nouns minus adjectives.
So positive numbers here are where the nouns are higher than the adjectives here.
Which means that the distance that these pathways are traversing uh, in state space are larger.
So nouns have larger distances compared to adjectives.
Now you don't really see any consistent results.
It it swaps back and forth between the categories.
And to be honest, I'm not sure if there is a meaningful interpretation of that or if this would be
over interpreting noise to some extent.
This question will be addressed with the next exercise, but in reality, what you'd want to do is basically
repeat this kind of analysis with a lot more text data.
And maybe we see inconsistent results here simply because we just don't have a lot of data.
This was quite an intense set of exercises.
So the last exercise here is super duper simple and just geared towards examining reproducibility.
All you need to do is rerun exercises two through five using GPT two x instead of the large version.
Now, I do not recommend copying and pasting all the code cells, nor do I recommend doing anything
fancy, like writing a big for loop or setting up a toggle.
Just go back to the code, change the model name, and then rerun all the code.
Now it's trivial that the numerical results will be at least somewhat different.
The question here is whether the overall features of the key findings seem to be consistent or different
between the two models.
And in particular, I'm thinking about the nature of the scree plot and the last plot of the differences
between the distances, the path lengths that we looked at at the end of exercise five.
Okay, so now I'm going to switch to Python and show the results.
So all I'm going to do is change the X the large to XL.
And then I'm going to press runtime and run cell and below.
So that will run this cell.
and it's going to run everything else below.
This is going to take a moment to import the Excel version of this model.
Okay.
So I thought this was going to be simple, but unfortunately I ran out of memory.
And this happened because yeah, when you run a lot of code often I keep rerunning code over and over
again.
You just get some like memory leaks and you end up with a lot of variables that you used, but you no
longer need.
And they're just sitting there on the GPU.
When you run into a situation like that, the best thing to do is disconnect and delete the runtime.
That will just completely obliterate everything that you did.
Not the code, of course, and then just rerun the whole thing from scratch.
So the scree plot shows some interesting differences relative to the large version of GPT two.
In particular, it particular, it looks like we are explaining maybe around 10% more variance from
the top two components.
So this is somewhere around 45.
This is around ten, so around 55% of the variance.
And I didn't do the exact calculation.
But with the large version of the model I think it was 40% somewhere around there.
Okay.
So that is one difference.
So that actually helps justify the use of a state space analysis approach, because we really see these
two components beautifully popping out from the rest of the components.
Okay.
So now we look here, we see the trajectories themselves look kind of different.
But you do see something several really consistent features, which is that they are much further apart
from each other.
The nouns and the adjectives compared to what we saw a couple of videos ago.
And their distances also increase, uh, quite, uh, you know, powerfully until the very end where
it just drops and they merge together.
Okay.
And then here now, this is pretty interesting because now we see that, uh, the pattern.
So this pattern is overall still the same as with the slightly smaller version of this language model
in that, uh, it increases ferociously as we get deeper into the model.
But now we actually see a result that is pretty consistent.
So now nouns compared to adjectives have generally longer paths, so longer trajectories pretty much
everywhere throughout the model with the exception of, you know, the very beginning.
So this certainly looks a lot more consistent than it did with the large model.
My prediction for the outcome of this analysis was that the nouns would be longer in state space than
the adjectives, and that was based on reasoning that processing nouns and generating predictions for
what words come after nouns generally requires integrating over more tokens.
So more information, more context further back in the text, and so on.
Compared to adjectives, of course, adjectives also need to integrate across tokens, but in English
it is generally the case that the noun that the adjective modifies is pretty close to the adjective
itself, which means that the context window integration demands are generally lower.
And so was that hypothesis confirmed in the data for the Excel version?
I think that it did seem like the results were consistent with the hypothesis for the GPT two large
I.
It's not so clear.
There wasn't like really clear, resounding, overwhelming evidence consistent with my hypothesis that
was also consistent across models.
But I would say that it seems like it is the case.
But of course you should keep in mind all of the like typical limitations that are always present in
this course, which is that I used a fairly small sample size only from one text, and it's a rather
old text, which is quite different from the modern texts that these models have been pre-trained on.
Nonetheless, I want to be clear that my hesitation about the interpretations is about the specific
scientific interpretation of the results, and my hesitation is not about the method itself.
It's a great method.
Definitely worth including in your ever growing toolkit of data analysis methods.